---
title: Context Switching
layout: blog
image: /images/context-switching/cover.jpg
excerpt: |
  A curious connection between context switching and being judgemental
---


# Context Switching


_Posted on November 26th, 2017_


What is context in the first place, and thus a context switch? One way
of looking at context is being composed of:

1. A current state
2. Possibly some past states
3. A mode of operation

For example, let's say my current mental context is writing this post.
My current state is the thoughts I have in my mind on the topic of
context switching. My past state is perhaps the last five minutes of
thoughts on the matter.

Most importantly, I'm operating in a certain "mode". This is a different
mode from say having a discussion with someone, or running long
distance. By mode, I suppose I mean a way of thinking, with associated
emphasis on certain thought patterns. This deserves a separate analysis.

It's worth noting that some modes may be closer than others. For
example, my current state of autonomous focus is likely more similar to
long distance running than having a discussion, although there are
certainly elements of both.

A context switch is then to transition the mind's gaze to a different
state, resetting or resuming a separate historical context or train of
thought. This brings us to the core topic: how context switching may
relate to rapid mental malleability. By mental malleability in this
case, I mean the ability to rapidly interact with a scenario with
limited prejudice from other scenarios.

By breaking down the notion of "context", or "scenario", prejudice in
our lens means confounding (1) states, (2) history, and (3) mode of
operation. Thus if I were to start having a discussion with someone
right now, especially about a different topic, I'd have to store my
current mental state writing this post, to resume later. It would
probably not be a perfect process. Most likely, I'd also forget my
historical train of thought herein, to some extent. But, in my opinion,
most importantly, I'd bring over the baggage of my "blog" way of
thinking to the discussion. Indeed, the distortion goes both ways. It's
very possible the conversation, consciously or otherwise, gets biased
towards the exposition of some topic. Conversely, when I return to
writing, my prose may become more colloquial.

Presumably with practice and effort, one can get better at jumping
around mentally with less distortion and baggage. I imagine this skill
can be generalised to all situations, where a fresh state of mind can
mean the perception and processing of true reality within the context,
as opposed to ones from the past.

